# AWS Data Warehouse
## Introduction
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database and wants to move their processes and data onto the cloud. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As their data engineer, I was tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of dimensional tables for their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

## Project Datasets
I worked with two datasets that reside in S3. Here are the S3 links for each:

Song data: s3://udacity-dend/song_data
Log data: s3://udacity-dend/log_data

### Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json

### Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files in the dataset I worked with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json

## Schema for Song Play Analysis
Using the song and event datasets, I created a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. Our data warehouse consists of two staging tables, one fact table and four dimension tables. They are detailed below:

### Staging Tables
TABLE NAME: staging_events
TABLE COLUMNS: event_id, artist, auth, first_name, gender, item_in_session, last_name, length, level, location, method, page, registration, session_id, song, status, start_time, user_agent, user_id

TABLE NAME: staging_songs
TABLE COLUMNS: num_songs, artist_id, artist_latitude, artist_longitude, artist_location, artist_name, song_id, title, duration, year

### Fact Table
TABLE NAME: songplays
TABLE COLUMNS: songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent
NOTES: The songplays fact table was sorted by start_time and distributed by key using song_id.

### Dimension Tables
TABLE NAME: users
TABLE COLUMNS: user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
NOTES: users table was distributed using 'ALL' since it is small.

TABLE NAME: songs
TABLE COLUMNS:song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
NOTES: The songs dimension is large and since songs and artists are usually analyzed together, I sorted and distributed by artist_id.

TABLE NAME: artists  
TABLE COLUMNS:artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
NOTES: The artists table was distributed using 'ALL' since it is small.

TABLE NAME: time
start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday

## REPO CONTENTS
*create_table.py* creates fact and dimension tables for the star schema in Redshift.

*etl.py* starts ETL that loads data from S3 into staging tables on Redshift and then process that data into analytics tables on Redshift.

*sql_queries.py* SQL statements reference

*launch_redshift* Launches Redshift cluster

*README.md* project description
